>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 3:
ISIS MILITANTS STRIKE AGAIN--
THIS TIME IN BAGHDAD-- KILLING
MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE.
RURAL TOWNS IN THE UNITED STATES
BANDING TOGETHER TO FINALLY GET
HIGH-SPEED INTERNET SERVICE.
AND ROBOTS EXPLORING SEWERS IN
SEARCH OF CLUES ABOUT PUBLIC
HEALTH.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IT IS THE THIRD MASS KILLING OF
CIVILIANS BELIEVED TO BE CARRIED
OUT BY THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP--
ISIS-- IN A WEEK.
TODAY THE COUNTRY TARGETED WAS
IRAQ.
A SUICIDE TRUCK BOMB BLEW UP
SHORTLY AFTER MIDNIGHT IN A BUSY
SHOPPING AREA OF CENTRAL BAGHDAD
WHERE FAMILIES WERE CELEBRATING
THE END OF THE MUSLIM HOLY MONTH
OF RAMADAN.
IRAQI OFFICIALS SAY THE BOMBING
KILLED AT LEAST 115 PEOPLE AND
WOUNDED NEARLY 200 MORE.
THE VICTIMS KILLED INCLUDED 15
CHILDREN.
THIS IS THE MOST LETHAL ATTACK
ON CIVILIANS IN IRAQ IN A YEAR.
WHEN IRAQI PRIME MINISTER HAIDER
AL-ABADI VISITED THE SCENE, HE
WAS MET WITH ANGRY CROWDS; SOME
THROWING ROCKS AND SHOES AT HIM.
A SECOND CAR BOMBING NORTH OF
BAGHDAD TODAY KILLED AT LEAST
FIVE PEOPLE AND WOUNDED 16
OTHERS.
THE ATTACKS COME A WEEK AFTER
AMERICAN-BACKED IRAQI FORCES
RECAPTURED THE CITY OF FALLUJAH,
WHICH ISIS HAD OCCUPIED FOR TWO
YEARS.
TODAY, BANGLADESH BEGAN TWO DAYS
OF NATIONAL MOURNING FOLLOWING
FRIDAY NIGHT'S ISIS ATTACK ON A
RESTAURANT POPULAR WITH
FOREIGNERS IN THE CAPITAL OF
DHAKA.
SEVEN TERRORISTS, TARGETING NON-
MUSLIMS, KILLED 20 HOSTAGES,
INCLUDING THREE U.S. COLLEGE
STUDENTS, AND TWO POLICE
OFFICERS.
BANGLADESHI OFFICIALS SAID TODAY
ALL SEVEN ATTACKERS WERE FROM
BANGLADESH, AND THE POLICE HAD
SOUGHT TO ARREST FIVE OF THEM
BEFORE THE ATTACK.
13 SUSPECTS IN TUESDAY'S ATTACK
ON THE AIRPORT IN ISTANBUL,
TURKEY, MADE THEIR FIRST COURT
APPEARANCES TODAY.
THEY ARE AMONG 27 MEN DETAINED
IN CONNECTION WITH THE MASS
SHOOTING AND TRIPLE SUICIDE
BOMBING THAT KILLED MORE THAN 40
PEOPLE AND INJURED 240 OTHERS.
TURKEY'S PRESIDENT RECEP TAYYIP
ERDOGAN SAID YESTERDAY THE
INVESTIGATION POINTS TO THE
THREE ATTACKERS BEING TRAINED BY
ISIS.
JOHN McCAIN, THE 2008 REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE, SAID TODAY
NEITHER DONALD TRUMP NOR HILLARY
CLINTON HAS A STRATEGY TO
SUCCEED IN THE WAR ON ISIS.
McCAIN, WHO SUPPORTS TRUMP AS
THIS YEAR'S REPUBLICAN NOMINEE,
IS ON A VISIT TO AFGHANISTAN
WITH SENATOR LINDSEY GRAHAM, AND
TODAY THEY SAID PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S PLAN TO WITHDRAW HALF OF
THE NEARLY 10,000 U.S. TROOPS IN
AFGHANISTAN IS A MISTAKE.
PLEASE DO NOT CUT THE TROOPS IN
HALF.
IF YOU DO, AFGHANISTAN WILL
BECOME THE NEXT IRAQ VERY
QUICKLY.
>> AND HAVE RULES OF ENGAGEMENT
THAT WE CAN UTILIZE THE FULL USE
OF AMERICAN MILITARY POWER.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
HAS SAID THE TROOP LEVEL WILL
DROP TO 5,500 BY THE END OF THE
YEAR OR EARLY 2017.
FIND OUT WHY THE HOLE IN THE
OZONE LAYER OVER THE SOUTH POLE
APPEARS TO BE SHRINKING.
GO TO www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: TOMORROW IN
VENEZUELA, PRESIDENT NICOLAS
MADURO WILL END ELECTRICITY
RATIONING THAT BEGAN IN APRIL,
FOLLOWING A DROUGHT THAT
AFFECTED WATER LEVELS AT THE
HYDROELECTRIC DAM THAT PROVIDES
MOST OF THE COUNTRY'S POWER.
THE RATIONING HAS CUT OFF
ELECTRICITY TO MUCH OF THE
COUNTRY FOR FOUR HOURS A DAY.
STILL, VENEZUELANS ARE
STRUGGLING WITH SHORTAGES OF
FOOD, MEDICINE AND OTHER
NECESSITIES, WITH INCREASING
FINGER-POINTING AT MADURO'S
LEADERSHIP.
FOR MORE ON THESE CHALLENGES,"
NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER
NICHOLAS CASEY JOINS ME BY SKYPE
FROM THE NATION'S CAPITAL,
CARACAS.
PICTURES AND THE STORIES THAT
YOU'VE SEEN ARE REALLY TRAGIC.
TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE RIDING FOR
FOOD.
HAS THAT BASIC NEED GOT ANY
CLOSER TO BEING MET?
>> NO, AND IT'S NOT CLEAR THAT
IT'S GOING TO BE MET THIS SUMMER
AT ALL.
STILL IN A SITUATION WHERE THERE
ARE LONG LINES TO GET FOOD,
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING
INTO GROCERY STORES, BY FORCE,
TO GET WHAT'S IN THERE.
AND YOU KNOW, THE REASON THIS IS
HAPPENING FOR THE MOST PART IS
BECAUSE VENEZUELA ISN'T ABLE TO
PRODUCE FOOD THAT IT NEEDS AND
IT IS NOT ABLE TO BUY THE FOOD
THAT IT NEEDS TO IMPORT IF IT
CAN'T MAKE WHAT IT NEEDS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THIS
SOMETHING ACUTE TO THE CITIES OR
ACROSS THE COUNTRY?
>> WE STOPPED IN A TOWN CAULKED
BOCA de CHIDE, A FISHING
VILLAGE.
ABOUT A WEEK BEFORE WE GOT THERE
THEY HAD SACKED TWO PLACES, ONE
A BREAD STORE, THE OTHER A
CHINESE GROCERY STORE.
AND IF 500 PEOPLE, A HUGE PART
OF THE TOWN HAD GONG OUT IN THIS
FISHING VILLAGE TO GET WHAT THEY
COULD FIND.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE ANY
SORT OF RECOURSE THAT THESE POOR
AND HUNGRY PEOPLE HAVE?
>> ONE THING THE OPTION IS
TRYING TO ORGANIZE A REFERENDUM
WHICH WOULD RECALL NICOLAS
MADURO.
HE DOESN'T FEEL IT IS NECESSARY,
THEY ARE NOT MAKING UP THIS
ROUTE TO GET RID OF MADURO, IN
FACT THEY HAVE GATHERED A LARGE
NUMBER OF SIGNATURES AT THIS
POINT.
THE PROCESS IS BEGINNING TO
ADVANCE BUT IT IS UNCLEAR
WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WHICH HAS
CONTROL OVER THE AGENCIES AND
MECHANISMS IN WHICH A RECALL
WOULD BE ORGANIZED IS GOING TO
ALLOW THIS TO HAPPEN.
BUT THE BIGGER QUESTION THOUGH
HARI IS IF THERE IS A
REFERENDUM, ID THERE IS A NEW
GOVERNMENT IN POWER WILL THEY BE
ABLE TO PUT MORE FOOD ON
PEOPLES' PLATES?
THAT IS NOT CLEAR.
FOR SO MANY YEARS, VENEZUELA WAS
DEPENDENT ON OIL TO BRING IN
ALMOST EVERYTHING THEY NEEDED.
THIS COUNTRY HAD BECOME A RICH
GUY WHO FORGOT HOW TO COOK AND
ORDERING TAKEOUT FOR YEARS AND
SUDDENLY WHEN THE MONEY
DISAPPEARED THERE WAS NO MONEY
TO BUY SOME OF THE BASICS
ANYMORE.
THAT MODEL DOESN'T CHANGE,
WHETHER THE OPPOSITION OR THE
CHEVISTAS ARE IN POWER, THE LEFT
IS IN FOUR OR NOT.
THAT REMAINS THE SAME.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
NICK CASEY OF THE NEW YORK TIMES
JOINING US, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: OF THE ESTIMATED
34 MILLION AMERICANS WHO LACK
HIGH SPEED INTERNET ACCESS AT
HOME, THE OVERWHELMING MAJORITY
LIVE IN RURAL AREAS OF THE
COUNTRY.
DESPITE THE LIMITED OPTIONS
AVAILABLE TO THEM, SOME OF THESE
COMMUNITIES HAVE FOUND A WAY TO
BRING STATE-OF-THE-ART
CONNECTIVITY TO THEIR RESIDENTS,
BY DOING IT THEMSELVES.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
EXPLAINS IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
THIS REPORT IS PART OF OUR
SERIES ON URBAN IDEAS, WHICH
EXPLORES HOW CITIES AND TOWNS
TACKLE PROBLEMS TO IMPROVE THEIR
QUALITY OF LIFE.
>> Reporter: VISITING THE RURAL
HILL TOWNS OF WESTERN
MASSACHUSETTS, YOU PROBABLY
WOULDN'T BE SURPRISED BY PEOPLE
IN CAFES OR COFFEE HOUSES TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF FREE WI-FI TO WORK
AND CHECK EMAILS.
BUT YOU MIGHT BE SURPRISED BY
THE LENGTHS THEY GO JUST TO GET
ONLINE.
>> MY STRATEGY, DO IT LATE AT
NIGHT WHEN EVERYBODY IN MY HOUSE
IS, LIKE, ASLEEP SO THAT
EVERYTHING WORKS WELL.
>> BECAUSE WE HAVE SO MANY
PEOPLE THAT USE IT, IT OVERWORKS
OUR ROUTER, SO WE HAVE TO RESET
IT PERIODICALLY.
>> Reporter: BEYOND THE BOSTON
METROPOLITAN AREA THERE IS A
DIGITAL DIVIDE IN MASSACHUSETTS.
THOUGH THE STATE HAS THE 15th
LARGEST POPULATION IN THE
COUNTRY AND A THRIVING TECH
INDUSTRY, SMALL TOWNS IN THE
MORE RURAL CENTRAL AND WESTERN
REGIONS LIKE NEW MARLBOROUGH,
GOSHEN, AND NEW SALEM STILL
STRUGGLE WITH CONNECTIVITY
BECAUSE CABLE COMPANIES THE MOST
COMMON PROVIDERS OF INTERNET
ACCESS TO AMERICAN HOMES AND
BUSINESSES DON'T OFFER THEM HIGH
SPEED INTERNET.
AND THE BAY STATE ISN'T THE ONLY
ONE FACING THIS PROBLEM.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, THE FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
RELEASED FINDINGS SHOWING THAT
10% OF AMERICANS ARE WITHOUT
ACCESS TO HIGH SPEED INTERNET.
BUT WHEN YOU GO TO A RURAL AREA
LIKE HERE IN WESTERN
MASSACHUSETTS, THAT NUMBER RISES
TO 39%.
THAT LACK OF HIGH SPEED ACCESS
IS AFFECTING RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES ALIKE.
JANE IREDALE'S MAKEUP COMPANY IN
GREAT BARRINGTON, MASSACHUSETTS
EMPLOYS MORE THAN A HUNDRED
RESIDENTS IN THE AREA.
IN THE 24-HOUR-A-DAY WORLD OF
ONLINE RETAIL, HER EMPLOYEES
NEED TO BE ABLE TO WORK FROM
ANYWHERE.
AND THAT'S WHERE THEY RUN INTO
PROBLEMS.
>> IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO FIND
THOSE PEOPLE WHO CAN ACTUALLY GO
HOME AND GET THE RIGHT
CONNECTIVITY FOR THEIR LAPTOPS.
BECAUSE A LOT OF PEOPLE HERE
DON'T HAVE CONNECTIVITY.
AND THIS IS VERY DIFFICULT WHEN
YOU'RE DEALING WITH A MANAGER
WHO HAS 12 PEOPLE UNDER HER, AND
SHE CAN'T GO HOME AND SUPERVISE
WHAT'S GOING ON IN AN EMERGENCY.
>> Reporter: THE POPULATION IN
WESTERN MASS HAS STAGNATED OR
DECLINED AS MORE YOUNG PEOPLE
LEAVE THE AREA IN SEARCH OF
BETTER JOB OPPORTUNITIES.
FOR EXAMPLE, BERKSHIRE COUNTY
WHICH BORDERS NEW YORK STATE HAS
SEEN ITS POPULATION DROP MORE
THAN 2.5% IN THE LAST SIX YEARS.
TIM NEWMAN, WHO MOVED TO THE
BERKSHIRES IN 2002 AND OPENED A
SMALL CAFE, SAYS PEOPLE LEAVE
THE REGION, IN PART, BECAUSE OF
A LACK OF CONNECTIVITY.
>> IT'S BAD FOR REAL ESTATE
VALUES, IT'S TERRIBLE FOR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, IT IS
UNFAIR AS FAR AS EDUCATION IS
CONCERNED.
>> Reporter: SUSAN CRAWFORD,
DIRECTOR OF HARVARD'S BERKMAN
CENTER FOR INTERNET AND SOCIETY,
SAYS IN 21st CENTURY AMERICA,
BEING ON THE WRONG SIDE OF THE
DIGITAL DIVIDE CAN BE
DEVASTATING FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH.
>> THE RISK OF NOT TREATING OUR
RURAL AREAS WELL WHEN IT COMES
TO HIGH-SPEED INTERNET ACCESS IS
THAT THEY BECOME EVEN MORE
HOLLOWED OUT THAN THEY ALREADY
ARE, THAT THEIR POPULATION JUST
VANISHES, THAT THEY ARE NO
LONGER SUSTAINABLE PLACES TO
LIVE.
WHO WOULD BUY A HOUSE TODAY
WITHOUT HIGH-SPEED INTERNET
ACCESS?
WHY WOULD YOU DO THAT?
AND SO YOU'RE LEAVING THESE
PLACES AND THEIR PROPERTY VALUES
AT TREMENDOUS RISK OF SIMPLY
COLLAPSE.
>> Reporter: WESTERN
MASSACHUSETTS RESIDENTS OFTEN
RESORT TO DIAL-UP PHONE LINES OR
SATELLITE DISHES FOR THEIR
ONLINE ACCESS, WHICH OFFER
DOWNLOAD SPEEDS STARTING AROUND
FIVE MEGABYTES PER SECOND-- FAR
SLOWER THAN THE 25 MEGABYTES PER
SECOND THAT THE F.C.C. HAS SET
AS A MINIMUM STANDARD FOR HIGH
SPEED INTERNET.
CUSTOMERS CAN PAY UP TO $90 A
MONTH FOR SATELLITE SERVICE,
ALMOST DOUBLE THE AVERAGE AMOUNT
CHARGED BY LARGE INTERNET
PROVIDERS.
CRAWFORD SAYS BIG DIVERSIFIED
MEDIA COMPANIES THAT PROVIDE
INTERNET AND CABLE SERVICE AVOID
BUILDING HIGH SPEED ONLINE
NETWORKS IN RURAL COMMUNITIES
BECAUSE THE EXPENSE OF DOING SO
IN A SPARSELY POPULATED AREA
DOESN'T OFFER THEM ENOUGH BANG
FOR THEIR BUCK.
>> THEY ARE RESPONDING
RATIONALLY TO WALL STREET, AND
WALL STREET WANTS THEM TO KEEP
THEIR PROFITS UP VERY HIGH.
AND FOR THEM, IT'S NOT AS
PROFITABLE TO RUN A WIRE TO A
REMOTE, ISOLATED AREA WITH A FEW
HOUSES IN IT.
>> Reporter: I MEAN, CAN YOU
BLAME THEM IF IT DOESN'T MAKE
FINANCIAL SENSE TO SERVICE A
LESS-POPULATED AREA?
>> FOR MANY UTILITY COMPANIES IN
THE UNITED STATES, IT DOES MAKE
SENSE.
IF YOU'RE LOOKING FOR MODEST,
STEADY RETURNS UNTIL THE SUN
EXPLODES, THIS IS ACTUALLY A
GREAT INVESTMENT.
IF INSTEAD YOU'RE A DIVERSIFIED
MEDIA COMPANY, IT DOESN'T MAKE
SENSE.
>> Reporter: TREATING THE
INTERNET AS A PUBLIC UTILITY,
LIKE A PHONE OR ELECTRIC
COMPANY, HAS BEEN GROWING MORE
POPULAR IN RECENT YEARS.
CHATTANOOGA, TENNESSEE, CEDAR
FALLS, IOWA, AND LAFAYETTE,
LOUISIANA ARE EXAMPLES OF THE
MORE THAN 80 U.S. CITIES THAT
HAVE BUILT PUBLICLY-OWNED HIGH
SPEED NETWORKS USING FIBER
OPTICS, THE FASTEST AND MOST
EFFICIENT INTERNET CONNECTION
CURRENTLY AVAILABLE.
THOUGH BUILDING A MUNICIPAL
FIBER NETWORK IS A BIG TASK THAT
MANY SMALL TOWNS AND RURAL AREAS
MAY BE UNABLE TO DO ON THEIR
OWN, RESIDENTS IN WESTERN
MASSACHUSETTS MAY HAVE FOUND A
SOLUTION.
OVER THE PAST SIX YEARS, MORE
THAN 40 TOWNS THROUGHOUT THE
REGION HAVE COME TOGETHER TO
FORM A HIGH SPEED INTERNET
COOPERATIVE CALLED "WIRED WEST"
WHOSE GOAL IS TO BUILD A HIGH
SPEED FIBER OPTICS NETWORK,
CONNECTING ALL THE TOWNS'
RESIDENTS AND BUSINESSES.
NEWMAN IS NOW ON WIRED WEST'S
BOARD AS A DELEGATE FOR HIS
TOWN, NEW MARLBOROUGH.
>> THE FIBER WILL PASS EVERY--
IT WILL BE ON EVERY ROAD, IT'LL
PASS EVERY DRIVEWAY, AND ANYONE,
HOWEVER REMOTE THEY ARE, WILL BE
ABLE TO GET SERVICE.
>> Reporter: BOB LABRIE, WHO
SERVES ON WIRED WEST'S EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE, SAYS THAT THE
COOPERATIVE MODEL CALLS FOR
TOWNS TO POOL THEIR RESOURCES
AND FORM A LARGER CUSTOMER BASE,
WHO WILL ALL BE PART OWNERS OF
THE NETWORK.
>> WE'RE NOT A STOCK COMPANY.
WE DON'T HAVE TO EARN A RETURN
ON EQUITY THAT WE HAVE TO PAY
BACK TO OUR SHAREHOLDERS.
THESE ARE ALL THINGS THAT ARE
SAVINGS THAT CAN BE PASSED ON TO
THE CUSTOMERS THAT WE ULTIMATELY
SERVE, MAKING IT MORE AFFORDABLE
AND SUSTAINABLE OVER THE LONG
RUN.
>> Reporter: IS BUILDING A FIBER
NETWORK REALLY SOMETHING THAT
SMALL TOWNS ARE ABLE TO DO?
OR IS THIS SOMETHING BETTER LEFT
TO PROFESSIONALS?
>> WHILE A SMALL TOWN ALONE
MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO BUILD THAT
NETWORK THAT YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT, WHEN YOU REGIONALIZE
SEVERAL TOWNS AND GET A LARGER
SCALE, YOU ATTRACT A DIFFERENT
CLIENTELE OR DIFFERENT PEOPLE
THAT MIGHT BE ABLE TO HELP YOU
BUILD THAT NETWORK.
>> Reporter: THIS DO IT YOURSELF
COOPERATIVE MODEL IS ALREADY
WORKING OVER 1,300 MILES AWAY
FROM WESTERN MASS IN SOUTHERN
MINNESOTA, WHERE 27 FARMING
COMMUNITIES HAVE FORMED "R.S.
FIBER".
IT'S MADE HIGH SPEED INTERNET
AVAILABLE FOR THE FIRST TIME TO
MORE THAN 1,500 HOMES AND
BUSINESSES.
AND IT'S CONTINUING TO EXTEND
THAT SERVICE TO MORE TOWNS AND
OUTLYING FARMS.
FOR RATES RANGING FROM $50 TO
$130 A MONTH, R.S. FIBER OFFERS
THEIR CUSTOMERS INTERNET SPEEDS
BETWEEN FIFTY AND 1,000
MEGABYTES OR ONE GIGABYTE PER
SECOND.
AT THAT SPEED, A USER COULD
DOWNLOAD A TWO-HOUR MOVIE FROM
iTUNES IN UNDER FIVE SECONDS.
JEFF NIELSEN, THE C.E.O. OF THE
UNITED FARMERS COOPERATIVE,
WHICH HAS BEEN INVOLVED WITH RS
FIBER SINCE ITS INCEPTION, SAYS
THAT HIGH SPEED ACCESS IS
ESSENTIAL TO MODERN FARMING
TECHNOLOGY, ALLOWING FARMERS TO
DETERMINE WITH PINPOINT ACCURACY
HOW TO GROW THE MOST CROPS WITH
THE MOST EFFICIENCY.
>> THIS TECHNOLOGY IS POWERFUL,
BECAUSE WE CAN GO UP TO OUR
FARMERS NOW WHO HAVE THE ABILITY
WITH THEIR MODERN EQUIPMENT TO
ADJUST HOW MANY SEEDS PER ACRE
THEY PLANT AS YOU'RE GOING
ACROSS THE FIELD.
THEY HAVE THE ABILITY TO ADJUST
HOW MUCH CROP NUTRIENTS THEY'RE
PUTTING DOWN AS THEY GO ACROSS
THE FIELD.
ALL THIS REQUIRES BROADBAND
TECHNOLOGY TO TALK TO THIS
EQUIPMENT.
THE HIGH-SPEED INTERNET IS
MAKING THIS MUCH EASIER.
>> Reporter: FARMER JAKE RIEKE
IS ONE OF THE BENEFICIARIES OF
THE NEW NETWORK.
HIS FAMILY HAS BEEN FARMING IN
THE AREA FOR OVER 150 YEARS.
WITH THE NEW TECHNOLOGY, HE CAN
SHARE INFORMATION ABOUT HIS
CROPS, UPLOAD OVERHEAD DRONE
FOOTAGE OF HIS FIELDS, AND
MONITOR HIS LIVESTOCK ON HIS
SMARTPHONE.
UNTIL RECENTLY, THE POOR QUALITY
OF THE INTERNET SERVICE
AVAILABLE TO HIM WAS AN
IMPEDIMENT.
>> I WOULD HAVE TO PLAN OUT MY
DAY IN TERMS OF DO I NEED A
LARGE CHUNK OF INTERNET AT
CERTAIN TIMES?
ARE MY KIDS GOING TO TRY
WATCHING NETFLIX AT A CERTAIN
TIME?
ARE THERE ANY MAJOR UPDATES TO
MY iPHONE OR TO MY SMART PHONE
OR TO ANY OF THE TABLETS OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT?
>> Reporter: WAS IT A PAIN? WAS
IT ANNOYING TO HAVE TO DEAL WITH
THAT?
>> ABSOLUTELY, YEAH.
EVERYTHING WAS JUST A STRUGGLE.
>> Reporter: FOR RIEKE, THE NEW
HIGH SPEED INTERNET IS A BOON
FOR HIS FARM AND A NECESSITY FOR
HIS TWO YOUNG DAUGHTERS.
>> TEACHERS ARE ALWAYS ASSIGNING
HOMEWORK THAT REQUIRES INTERNET
FOR RESEARCH.
IF YOU HAVE A QUALITY INTERNET
CONNECTION, IT REALLY OPENS UP A
LOT OF OPPORTUNITIES THAT YOU
WOULDN'T EVEN THINK ABOUT IF
YOUR INTERNET DIDN'T WORK RIGHT.
>> Reporter: RIEKE, WHO IS ALSO
THE VICE CHAIR OF RS FIBER, SAYS
THE NETWORK WILL ULTIMATELY COST
$45 MILLION TO BUILD.
THE TOWNS INVOLVED HAVE RAISED
THE MONEY BY ISSUING BONDS,
TAKING OUT LOANS, BRINGING
ONBOARD LOCAL INVESTORS, AND
THROUGH A $1 MILLION GRANT FROM
THE STATE OF MINNESOTA.
BACK IN MASSACHUSETTS, WIRED
WEST'S NETWORK IS ESTIMATED TO
COST BETWEEN $100 TO $120
MILLION.
THE TOWNS IN THE COOPERATIVE
HAVE AGREED TO BORROW TWO-THIRDS
OF THE COST AND ARE LOOKING TO
THE STATE TO FUND THE REMAINING
AMOUNT. UNTIL THEN, DEVELOPMENT
OF THE NETWORK IS ON HOLD.
SUSAN CRAWFORD SAYS THAT DESPITE
THE HIGH PRICE TAG, A WELL
THOUGHT-OUT HIGH SPEED NETWORK
WILL BE ABLE TO PAY FOR ITSELF
THROUGH SUBSCRIBER FEES AND
REMAIN SUSTAINABLE FOR YEARS TO
COME.
>> AS LONG AS YOU BUILD
DELIBERATELY AND INCREMENTALLY
AND MAKE SURE THAT YOU HAVE
ENOUGH REVENUE TO COVER THE NEXT
STAGE OF THE BUILD, THESE ARE
VERY SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATIONS
OF SOMETHING THAT EVERY OTHER
THING WE NEED TO DO AS A COUNTRY
RELIES ON.
>> Reporter: BOB LABRIE REMAINS
HOPEFUL THAT THE PROJECT WILL BE
COMPLETED WITHIN A FEW YEARS
ONCE CONSTRUCTION BEGINS.
>> WE STILL THINK THAT THERE'S A
ROLE FOR A REGIONAL COOPERATIVE
TO EXIST THAT WILL PROVIDE
REGIONAL SERVICES TO OUR
CUSTOMERS.
WE FEEL THAT WHEN WE HAVE A
GROUP OF TOWNS TOGETHER, A
COOPERATIVE, WE HAVE A BIGGER
VOICE AT THE NEGOTIATING TABLE
FOR WHEN WE'RE LOOKING FOR
VENDORS TO COME IN TO PROVIDE
INTERNET SERVICE, TO PROVIDE
TELEPHONE SERVICE, TO PROVIDE
TELEVISION SERVICE, TO PROVIDE
SERVICE THAT WE HAVEN'T EVEN
DREAMED ABOUT YET.
>> Reporter: TIM NEWMAN INSISTS
THE DEMAND FOR THESE SERVICES IS
JUST AS GREAT IN HIS SMALL TOWN
OF NEW MARLBOROUGH,
MASSACHUSETTS, AS IT IS IN BIG
CITIES.
>> THERE'S REALLY NO DIFFERENCE
FOR PEOPLE WHO LIVE HERE THAN
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN BOSTON AND
NEW YORK OR LOS ANGELES OR
ANYWHERE.
IN ORDER TO DO THINGS AS PART OF
YOUR LIFE, YOU NEED CONNECTIVITY
TO THE INTERNET.
IT'S NOT A LUXURY, IT'S A
UTILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: INCREASINGLY IN
THE U.S., CITY GOVERNMENTS ARE
TURNING TO BIG DATA AND
TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE
PERFORMANCE AND PLANNING.
IN ANOTHER PART OF
MASSACHUSETTS, THE CITY OF
CAMBRIDGE IS NOW DEPLOYING
ROBOTS UNDERGROUND TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND PUBLIC HEALTH.
THIS REPORT IS ALSO PART OF OUR"
URBAN IDEAS" SERIES LOOKING AT
INNOVATIONS IN THE WAYS CITIES
ARE SOLVING PROBLEMS.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE MOST UNPLEASANT
JOB IN ALL OF CAMBRIDGE,
MASSACHUSETTS, BOSTON NEXT DOOR
NEIGHBOR, MAY WELL BELONG TO A
ROBOT NAMED LUIGI.
THESE RESEARCHERS FROM THE
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY LOWER LUIGI INTO THE
CITY'S SEWER SYSTEM TO COLLECT
SAMPLES OF HUMAN WASTEWATER.
MORE THAN TWO-FEET LONG THIS
ROBOT IS ON THE CUTTING EDGE OF
DATA COLLECTION AND PUBLIC
HEALTH RESEARCH. HE WAS CREATED
BY M.I.T.'S SENSEABLE CITY LAB,
WHICH INNOVATES NEW APPROACHES
TO STUDY URBAN ENVIRONMENTS.
>> IT'S A GREAT WAY TO GET
BEHAVIORAL DATA THAT WOULD BE
VERY DIFFICULT TO GET ON A
PERSON-BY-PERSON BASIS.
>> Reporter: M.I.T. BIOLOGICAL
ENGINEERING PROFESSOR ERIC ALM
HELPS OVERSEE THE PROJECT.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF FOLKS
LOOKING AT SEWAGE OFTEN AT THE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT.
WE'RE TRYING TO GO CLOSER TO
PEOPLE'S HOMES AND SAY, 'WELL,
WHAT'S REALLY COMING OUT?' WHAT
CAN WE LEARN ABOUT THE HUMAN
ACTIVITIES THAT ARE GOING ON IN
A CITY BY LOOKING AT THESE
BACTERIA, VIRUSES, CHEMICALS,
CLOSER TO THE PEOPLE THAT
ENCOUNTER THEM?
>> Reporter: ONCE LUIGI IS
FINISHED GATHERING, THE STUDENTS
PULL HIM OUT OF THE SEWER AND
TAKE HIS DATA TO ALM'S LAB.
LAUNCHED LAST YEAR, THE ROBOT IS
A KEY PLAYER IN A PILOT PROGRAM
KNOWN AS "UNDERWORLDS" LAUNCHED
LAST YEAR.
THE PREMISE IS THAT SEWAGE CAN
BE MINED FOR DATA IN REAL-TIME
TO INFORM POLICY MAKERS, HEALTH
OFFICIALS, AND CITY PLANNERS
ABOUT THE HEALTH OF RESIDENTS.
>> PEOPLE IN PUBLIC WORKS WANT
TO KNOW, "ARE THERE PEOPLE WHO
ARE ILLEGALLY DUMPING THEIR
SEWAGE INTO THE STORM DRAINS?"
PEOPLE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE WANT TO KNOW, "ARE
PEOPLE MAKING BOMBS IN THEIR
BATHTUB?
COULD WE DETECT THOSE
CHEMICALS."
PEOPLE IN PUBLIC HEALTH WANT TO
KNOW, "WHAT ARE THE NEW DISEASES
THAT ARE EMERGING?
CAN WE SEQUENCE THEM?
CAN WE GET IDENTIFICATION OF
THESE BACTERIA BEFORE PEOPLE GET
SICK?"
>> Reporter: SUCH KNOWLEDGE
COULD POTENTIALLY ALTER
CAMBRIDGE'S UNDERSTANDING OF
ISSUES RANGING FROM DEMOGRAPHIC
PATTERNS, NUTRITIONAL INTAKE AND
EVEN ILLICIT DRUG USE.
SAM LIPSON IS DIRECTOR OF
ENVIRONMENT HEALTH WITH
CAMBRIDGE'S PUBLIC HEALTH
DEPARTMENT.
>> WE'RE SO USED TO HAVING
BROADER OUTCOME MEASURES LIKE,'
HOW MANY PEOPLE SHOWED UP IN
THE EMERGENCY ROOM? OR ' WHAT'S
THE RATE OF AN INFECTIOUS
DISEASE?'"
>> Reporter: LIPSON ENVISIONS A
FUTURE WHERE THE CITY'S HEALTH
EFFORTS WILL BE MORE PRECISE AND
MORE EASILY MEASURED.
>> RESOURCES ARE ALWAYS LIMITED,
AND YOU MAY IDENTIFY THAT THERE
IS ONE OR TWO NEIGHBORHOODS
WITHIN THE CITY WHERE THERE'S A
GREATER INDICATION OF A GREATER
LIKELIHOOD OF DIABETES
DEVELOPING IN THAT NEIGHBORHOOD.
THIS WOULD BE A WAY OF
ALLOCATING RESOURCES AND THEN
BEING ABLE TO MEASURE WHETHER OR
NOT YOU'VE ACTUALLY HAD AN
IMPACT.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE ARE
BROADER SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS
SURROUNDING JUST WHAT LUIGI AND
THE LAB ARE CAPABLE OF LEARNING
AND REVEALING ABOUT PEOPLE.
>> THE BIG QUESTION FOR US IS
GOING TO BE PRIVACY, AND WE'VE
TRIED TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
MONITORING AN AREA THAT HAS AT
LEAST 5,000 PEOPLE, SO WE GIVE
PEOPLE SOME EXTENT OF ANONYMITY
THAT WAY.
>> Reporter: IS IT REASONABLE TO
THINK YOU COULD TAKE THIS DOWN
TO THE MICRO LEVEL, SINGLE
HOUSEHOLD?
>> WE'RE NOT GOING TO DO THAT. I
THINK IT WOULD BE EXPENSIVE TO
DO THAT, SO YOU'D HAVE TO HAVE A
VERY TARGETED QUESTION.
AND I DON'T THINK PEOPLE WOULD
WANT THAT.
>> THERE'S NO REAL POSSIBILITY
OF TRACKING ANY PIECE OF DATA
BACK TO ANY INDIVIDUAL, THESE
ARE REALLY COMBINED SAMPLES
THROUGH A COMBINED WASTE STREAM,
AND THERE'S SIMPLY NO TAGS OR
METADATA.
THERE ARE GOING TO BE QUESTIONS
DOWN THE ROAD ABOUT HOW YOU WORK
WITH A COMMUNITY, SINCE IN MY
VIEW THE COMMUNITY WOULD OWN
THIS DATA, TO MAKE THAT THEN
AVAILABLE AND BENEFICIAL.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE I CAN ALSO
ENVISION COMMERCIAL
IMPLICATIONS.
>> EXACTLY, RIGHT, YOU COULD
IMAGINE IF THEY COULD TARGET A
NEIGHBORHOOD, OR EVEN A CITY
THAT HAS A HIGH RATE OF A
CERTAIN CHRONIC DISEASE, OR
MAYBE OF INDICATORS TO SUGGEST
THOSE DISEASES WILL OCCUR LATER
ON, THAT THEY MIGHT FIND THAT
VALUABLE INFORMATION.
AND SO THERE ARE SOME REALLY
IMPORTANT QUESTIONS EVENTUALLY
THAT NEED TO GET ADDRESSED, BUT
WE HAVE A LITTLE TIME TO WORK
THAT OUT.
>> Reporter: THIS SUMMER THE
UNDERWORLD'S PROJECT PLANS TO
DEPLOY TEN MORE ROBOTS LIKE
LUIGI TO SAMPLE SEWERS
THROUGHOUT CAMBRIDGE AND BOSTON.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA, WHO ONCE VISITED A NAZI
CONCENTRATION CAMP WITH NOBEL
PEACE PRIZE WINNER AND HOLOCAUST
SURVIVOR ELIE WIESEL, SAYS
WIESEL TOLD HIM: "MEMORY HAS
BECOME A SACRED DUTY OF ALL
PEOPLE OF GOODWILL."
THE PRESIDENT SAID TODAY
UPHOLDING THAT DUTY BECAME THE
PURPOSE OF WIESEL'S LIFE.
WIESEL DIED YESTERDAY AT HIS
HOME HERE IN NEW YORK CITY.
HE WAS 87 YEARS OLD.
WIESEL ACCOMPANIED PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND GERMAN CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL ON A 2009 VISIT TO
BUCHENWALD.
THAT WAS THE SECOND
CONCENTRATION CAMP WHERE THE
TEENAGE WIESEL WAS HELD DURING
WORLD WAR TWO; IT'S ALSO WHERE
THE NAZIS KILLED HIS FATHER.
"THANK YOU, MR. PRESIDENT, FOR
ALLOWING ME TO COME BACK TO MY
FATHER'S GRAVE."
BEFORE BUCHENWALD, THE NAZIS
ROUNDED UP HIS WHOLE FAMILY,
ALONG WITH 15,000 JEWS FROM
THEIR HOMETOWN IN ROMANIA, AND
SENT THEM TO AUSCHWITZ.
HIS MOTHER AND YOUNGER SISTER
DIED THERE.
WIESEL DOCUMENTED THE GENOCIDE
IN HIS FIRST PERSON ACCOUNT,"
NIGHT," AND DOZENS OF OTHER
BOOKS.
HE EMBODIED THE CALL TO "NEVER
FORGET" THOSE WHO DIED IN THE
HOLOCAUST.
HIS 1986 NOBEL PEACE PRIZE
CITATION DESCRIBED HIS MESSAGE
AS "ONE OF PEACE, ATONEMENT AND
HUMAN DIGNITY."
>> WE MUST SPEAK.
WE MUST TAKE SIDES.
FOR NEUTRALITY HELPS THE
OPPRESSOR, NEVER THE VICTIM.
>> Sreenivasan: HE WAS
INSTRUMENTAL IN CREATING THE
HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM IN
WASHINGTON.
AND WIESEL OFTEN SPOKE OUT
AGAINST VIOLENCE AND
OPPRESSION, CALLING FOR
INTERVENTION TO STOP ETHNIC
CLEANSING IN BOSNIA AND THE
DARFUR REGION OF SUDAN.
>> DO NOT WAIT FOR SUDAN'S
INVITATION OR CONSENT.
>> Sreenivasan: HIS WIDOW,
MARION, SAID TODAY HER HUSBAND
WAGED COUNTLESS BATTLES FOR
INNOCENT VICTIMS REGARDLESS OF
ETHNICITY OR CREED.
FINALLY, NASA'S JUNO SPACECRAFT
IS EXPECTED TO ENTER JUPITER'S
ORBIT TOMORROW.
BUT TODAY BUT CHINA COMPLETED
CONSTRUCTION OF THE WORLD'S
LARGEST RADIO TELESCOPE.
THE 500-METER WIDE TELESCOPE IS
EXPECTED TO BEGIN OPERATIONS IN
SEPTEMBER.
ITS MISSION, ACCORDING THE
CHINESE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES IS
STUDY THE ORIGINS OF THE
UNIVERSE AND SEARCH FOR EXTRA
TERRESTRIAL LIFE.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR, WHEN
DOES FREE SPEECH CROSS THE LINE
INTO LANGUAGE THAT IS DANGEROUS?
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.